# Quetico Hunter Island 2025

## Index

 1. 2025-08-06 - [Bottle Portage on Lac la Croix to island N of Saturday Bay Crooked Lake](#2025-08-06-day-1-bottle-portage-on-lac-la-croix-to-island-n-of-saturday-bay-crooked-lake)
 2. 2025-08-07 - [Crooked Lake to Moose Bay on Basswood River](#2025-08-07-day-2-crooked-lake-to-moose-bay-of-basswood-river)
 3. 2025-08-08 - [Basswood River to Canadian Point of Basswood Lake](#2025-08-08-day-3-moose-bay-of-basswood-river-to-canadian-point-on-basswood-lake)
 4. 2025-08-09 - [Basswood Lake to small island on Carp Lake](#2025-08-09-day-4-canadian-point-on-basswood-lake-to-carp-lake)
 5. 2025-08-10 - [Carp Lake to Ottertrack Lake near Little Knife Portage](#2025-08-10-day-5-carp-lake-to-ottertrack-lake)
 6. 2025-08-11 - [Ottertrack Lake to Saganagons Lake](#2025-08-11-day-6-ottertrack-lake-to-saganagons-lake)
 7. 2025-08-12 - [Saganagons Lake to Koko Falls portage](#2025-08-12-day-7-saganagons-lake-to-koko-falls)
 8. 2025-08-13 - [Koko Falls to island SW of Rose Island on Kawnipi Lake](#2025-08-13-day-8-koko-falls-to-west-of-rose-island-on-kawnipi-lake)
 9. 2025-08-14 - [Kawnipi Lake to burned island on Shelly Lake](#2025-08-14-day-9-west-of-rose-island-on-kawnipi-lake-to-shelly-lake)
10. 2025-08-15 - [Shelly Lake to downstream of Chatterton Falls on Russell Lake](#2025-08-15-day-10-shelly-lake-to-downstream-of-chatterton-falls-on-russell-lake)
11. 2025-08-16 - [Russell Lake to SW end of Sturgeon Lake, near exit to Maligne River](#2025-08-16-day-11-russell-lake-to-the-end-of-sturgeon-lake)
12. 2025-08-17 - [Maligne River to Tanner Lake E of May Island](#2025-08-17-day-12-end-of-sturgeon-lake-to-maligne-river)
13. 2025-08-18 - [Tanner Lake to Lou Island below Twin Falls of the Maligne River](#2025-08-18-day-13-tanner-lake-to-twin-falls-on-the-maligne-river)
14. 2025-08-19 - [Twin Falls on Maligne to Eau Claire](#2025-08-19-day-14-twin-falls-on-maligne-to-eau-claire)

## 2025-08-03 Boise to Eau Claire

Royce fetches me and my luggage from MSP to Dunbar's Canoe Outfitting in Eau
Claire. We have a nightcap, look at pictures, and chat.

[index](#index)

## 2025-08-04 Preparations in Eau Claire

*Mighty were their preparations.*

Royce has things well organized. He's bought food, drink, and fuel, and has
packaged them for the trip, found the necessary gear, and has tested and
organized it. But we still manage to run hither and thither, putting things into
things, and then those things into other things, and those things into his
truck. But we're not entirely lost&mdash;we do pack our passports so that
they'll be easy to access when we reach customs.

[index](#index)

## 2025-08-05 Eau Claire to Zups

We set an alarm for 0-dark-thirty. Brenda takes what she calls &ldquo;the final
picture.&rdquo;

![Ben and Royce, ready to roll 2025-08-05 08:26](./attachments/202508050826-000.jpeg "Ben and Royce, ready to roll 2025-08-05 08:26")

The drive to Crane Lake was easy, except for construction around Duluth. At the
marina, we unloaded our gear into Zups' boat, put our canoe on the rack on their
boat rack and let them tie it down, arranged parking, and headed off to customs.

![Royce in Zups boat on the way to Canadian customs 2025-08-05 15:56](./attachments/202508051556-000.jpeg "Royce in Zups boat on the way to Canadian customs 2025-08-05 15:56")

Clearing Canadian customs was painless. We were met by two agents at their dock
on Sandpoint Lake. One checked Royce's and my passports, briefly chatted with
us, and waved off that we were slightly over our duty-free liquor allowance. The
rest of the passengers were handled equally expeditiously, and we were on our
way.

Years ago, Dwight and I paddled to the Beatty Portage (Little Loon Lake
to Lac la Croix) because I thought the name was fun. Now I’ve seen the Loon River
Portage (Little Vermillion Lake to Loon River), and, for the first time, I’ve seen
both both railroads in operation.

![Beatty rail Portage for Loon Falls 2025-08-05 16:38](./attachments/202508051638-001.jpeg "Beatty rail Portage for Loon Falls 2025-08-05 16:38")

Royce is very happy that Zups has cold beer. Dinner was minestrone soup, pasta
salad, generous slices of a well-prepared prime rib, baked potato, and
bacon-wrapped asparagus, with carrot cake for dessert. Our server was a young
woman from New Zealand. She told us that she works a similar operations
year-round, but alternates between northern and southern hemisphere, so that she
never works in winter weather.

![Table for two at Zups 2025-08-05 18:03](./attachments/202508051803-000.jpeg "Table for two at Zups 2025-08-05 18:03")

After dinner, we were shuttled to a room on another island. The room leaned
run-down Motel 6, but was acceptable. We were surprised at the lack of potable
water. Fortunately, I'd filled our bottles at the dining hall.

A small group was cleaning fish on the dock.

![Royce in room at Zups 2025-08-05 19:53](./attachments/202508051953-000.jpeg "Royce in room at Zups 2025-08-05 19:53")

As we head to bed, mosquitoes are starting to bite, and rain is threatening.

## 2025-08-06 Day 1: Bottle Portage on Lac la Croix to island N of Saturday Bay Crooked Lake

### 2025-08-06T17:53:31-05:00 (48.20686, -91.84773) 1244 feet Camp on Crooked Lake

We've been in camp for an hour or so. I used the inReach to let the home front
know that we are here and that we are safe.

Zups picked us up promptly at 6:30. After breakfast, at around 9:00, they
dropped us off at Bottle Portage.

Before they were were dropped off at Black Robe Portage, we shared the boat with
a family that was taking their first canoe trip. Mom was *way* out of her
comfort zone but was being brave&mdash;her first time in a boat was her trip to
Zups, yesterday. She took her first swim lessons to prepare for this trip. Dad
had been on fishing trips before but had not led one. The daughter, who I
guessed to be about 10, was all in on whatever dad was doing. Grandma and
grandpa seemed bemused. Mom's brother seemed to think he would be lounging on a
beach. Their tent was huge and was meant for car camping&mdash;it even included
a porch. It's case had little wheels that might've been appropriate for a paved
campground but not for even the best of portages. As I understood them, their
plan was to put six people in one large canoe and to tow a solo canoe, which
would hold their gear. I wish them well.

This year, Royce is trying using trekking poles on the portages. So far, he
feels they help.

We saw a few groups on the portages.

The paddle through Bottle Lake and Iron Lake was easy and and we moved fast.

![Royce at Crooked Lake side of Curtain Falls 2025-08-06 12:09](./attachments/202508061209-002.jpeg "Royce at Crooked Lake side of Curtain Falls 2025-08-06 12:09")

The Curtain Falls portage took something out of both of us. As we paddled into
Crooked, the wind steadily built. To keep us out of the worst of the SSW wind, I
skirted the shore of Sunday Bay. The wind kept building, but the gusts were my
biggest concern. We both got so tired that we pulled up next to shore and took a
breather.

Since we have a BWCA permit, we decided to not fight the wind and to camp on the
US side.

We leapfrogged a group of seven young people that are using aluminum canoes. (We
later learned they are scouts.) Because of the MN2 is a fast boat and our better
technique, we moved much faster on the water than they did.

The wind made is somewhat difficult to set up the tent, but with that done, we
have &ldquo;cocktail a few minutes&rdquo;&mdash;El Jimador with lime and salt,
and snacks. We miss Jim and reminisce about our 2002 trip with him and Royce's
boys.

![Tequila on Crooked Lake 2025-08-06 17:44](./attachments/202508061744-000.jpeg "Tequila on Crooked Lake 2025-08-06 17:44")

Dinner is a bag salad and Royce's *ropa vieja* (old rope), with &ldquo;that's
not rice&rdquo; rice.

As we were pitching the tent, green beetles, of the same hue as the rain fly,
landed on the tent. They had perfect camouflage, just in the wrong place. We
both got a kick out of that.

There are a few breaks in the clouds. It's quite still and humid and
the bugs are whining outside of tent.

[Index](#index)

## 2025-08-07 Day 2: Crooked Lake to Moose Bay of Basswood River

### 2025-08-07T18:12:17-05:00 (48.14664, -91.69657) 1254 feet: Camp in Moose Bay

We slept hard until thunder and rain woke us. When it came, we learnt that
there is a trick to releasing the toggle that holds the rain fly out of the
way&mdash;we must be very careful to slide the toggle directly out of the loop
without allowing any twist.

![Royce having coffee. Crooked Lake north of Saturday Bay 2025-08-07 07:51](./attachments/202508070751-000.jpeg "Royce having coffee. Crooked Lake north of Saturday Bay 2025-08-07 07:51")

On the water well after 8:00.

Sunny, calm, enervating humidity.

Yesterday's group with three canoes paddled past us as we were breaking camp.

When we left camp, there were only light riffles on the lake and I was so into
how fast we were paddling that I was't watching the map closely enough and so
took us into a dead-end bay. By the time I realized what I had done, we had
paddled a mile or so out of the way. I still can't paddle and navigate at the
same time.

As the day went on, the wind from the south picked up. The sky went from clear
to cloudy and back again a few times.

After paddling for a few hours we slowed, but we were still averaging around 3
mph. When the wind shifted to blow our beam, we slowed more because more of my
effort went towards keeping us on course.

When we decided to break for lunch, we headed to a BWCA campsites because they
tend to have easy landings, and are often open the breeze. When we got to the
nearest one shown on our maps, the terrain matched the map so exactly that I
would have been confident, even without the GPS, that we were where the map
shows the site. But there was no campsite&mdash;just a thick layer of lichen
where it should have been. (So there has been little or no traffic there for
years, leaving me to wonder, how old are these maps?) However, the nearby
campsite in Quetico was right where the map said it should be *and* it had a
broken BWCA fire grate. We wonder if, when the BWCA camp was closed, some
enterprising soul moved the grate across the border.

![Royce. Lunch break on Crooked Lake north of Thursday Bay 2025-08-07 12:48](./attachments/202508071248-001.jpeg "Royce. Lunch break on Crooked Lake north of Thursday Bay 2025-08-07 12:48")

The narrows of Crooked Lake/Basswood River have more current than I
remember&mdash;even though we paddled hard, the current slowed us to just go
over 1 mph.

We decided that we will not tackle the first Basswood River portage today
because we remember that the camp sites close to the portage aren't nice. Royce
remembered that we had gone into Moose Bay on one of the trips with Ian. We
found a lovely campsite, just inside the bay and off the border route. We set up
camp, then Royce fished and I took a couple of short swims. &ldquo;Cocktail much
less than an hour&rdquo; with lime, salt, El Jimador, and snacks. Royce is
cooking dinner.

Our plan was to set off early so that we can make it past the Horse Portage with
enough time so that we can paddle far enough to reach a nice campsite on
Basswood Lake.

We heard thunder in the distance several times and the skies repeatedly cycled
between overcast and clear. Now, most clouds are mares tales, so we predict good
weather well into the evening.

![Royce cooking. Moose Bay on Basswood River 2025-08-07 18:13](./attachments/202508071813-000.jpeg "Royce cooking. Moose Bay on Basswood River 2025-08-07 18:13")

[index](#index)

## 2025-08-08 Day 3: Moose Bay of Basswood River to Canadian Point on Basswood Lake

<!-- I logged this location the next morning. Coordinates and elevation got from
     that. The coordinates are very close to the GPS waypoint 20250808 and the
     elevation from map. -->
### 2025-08-08T17:59:40-05:00 (48.06107, -91.56269) 1297 feet: Camp on Canadian Point

![Royce in camp on Canadian Point of Basswood Lake 2025-08-08 19:15](./attachments/202508081915-001.jpeg "Royce in camp on Canadian Point of Basswood Lake 2025-08-08 19:15")

Oh God, the bugs last night. We've been lucky that they're not nearly as active
in the morning.

![Royce and canoe. Camp on Moose Bay of Basswood River 2025-08-08 06:56](./attachments/202508080656-000.jpeg "Royce and canoe. Camp on Moose Bay of Basswood River 2025-08-08 06:56")

We leapfrogged the group of seven and learned that they are a scouting group
doing their
[*Order of the Arrow*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Order_of_the_Arrow) trip,
which I'm given to believe is a significant milestone. Quick math told me that
the sum of ages of the scouts & their guides added up to less than the sum of
our ages and that our canoe is older than any two of them.

One of their group, a young woman, was trying to get a pack on that was clearly
too heavy for her. But after I helped her to get the pack on, she moved faster
on the trail than I could. Youth...

The Lower Basswood Falls portage was easy.

![Downstream of Lower Basswood Falls 2025-08-08 08:40](./attachments/202508080840-000.jpeg "Downstream of Lower Basswood Falls 2025-08-08 08:40")

Where the outflow of two parts of Wheelbarrow Falls collide, the paddling is a
little tricky. It's been so long since I've done this route that that I'd
forgotten that.

The river had flooded the portage in spots but the trail bed was good, so we
just sloshed through the water.

In another "it's been a long time", I had forgotten about the short portage that
comes between Wheelbarrow Falls and Basswood Falls (Horse Portage). The current
kept me from landing where I wanted to, which turned out to be a good thing
because we ended up at the correct place. On this portage, we met a young couple
that were heading to Crooked. They were carrying only two small packs in
addition their canoe and two paddles (no spare). We greatly admire their gear
discipline.

We caught up with the scouts again on the Horse Portage. They plan to do it
halfway and then camp for the night. We slog through. It's long, hot,
muggy, and hard, but not as hard as I'd feared.

At the Basswood Lake end, the wind was blowing directly into the portage
landing. The trees were swaying, waves were breaking and, as far as we could
see, there were white horses.

We had a brief discussion of how we might get through the surf but quickly gave
that up as silly. So, since the wind was making it quite pleasant on shore and
there was no traffic (no sensible person would have chosen to be on Basswood in
this wind), we did the sensible thing and took a nap. We puttered around for a
bit, hanging our sweaty clothes to dry, etc., before we unrolled our RidgeRests
and got serious. An hour or so later, we were awoken by the wind dropping. Royce
has the brilliant idea of having coffee, so we do that load the boat. By the
time we were off, we were paddling through rollers but no chop, which made for
easy and fast paddling. With the coffee on board, we paddled at morning pace for
more than an hour.

![Royce with canoe at Basswood Lake end of Horse Portage 2025-08-08 16:09](./attachments/202508081609-000.jpeg "Royce with canoe at Basswood Lake end of Horse Portage 2025-08-08 16:09")

While we were paddling, the overcast was so thick that I began to worry about
how late it was.

As usual distances and speed confound us, so we spent more time than I would
like double checking the map and GPS. It was mildly annoying, but we never went
astray.

We reached camp around 18:00, set up the tent, and had tequila and limes, and
snacks. This is a pleasant campsite although footing is bad&mdash;rocks and
sticks everywhere.

We are tired. Royce made a quick meal of dried chicken, dried vegetables, and
ramen. It was better than the backpacker meals and only a little messier (one
pot, two spoons, and two cups to wash). We slurped it down, had a little more
tequila, and started putting camp to bed.

Then the bugs came. Double-plus ungood. So bad that I put on my bug net on and
didn't brush my teeth. The net helped a lot under the bill of my cap but not so
much around the ears.

We didn't properly close one of the tent doors fast enough, and so we spent
several minutes killing mosquitoes by the light of our headlamps. (Each tent
door has two zippers that must be brought together carefully so that a little
flap covers the hole where the zippers don't quite touch).

It was so hot in the tent that I couldn't sleep. We listened to an audio book
version of *Footfall* and I mopped sweat off my face, until we drifted off.

[index](#index)

## 2025-08-09 Day 4: Canadian Point on Basswood Lake to Carp Lake

### 2025-08-09T09:40:52-05:00 (48.06107, -91.56269) 1297 feet: Breakfast on camp on Canadian Point

<!-- Got into camp time of 18:00 is for 2025-08-09 and is based on the picture.
     However, the 20250809 waypoint was created at 18:41. -->

![Royce in camp on Carp Lake 2025-08-09 18:26](./attachments/202508091826-000.jpeg "Royce in camp on Carp Lake 2025-08-09 18:26")

At some point last night, distant thunder woke us. When the rain started, I had
to get out of the tent to untangle the toggle that holds the rain fly aside,
much as Royce did two nights before.

As the rain was petering out and I was drifting into sleep, the storm really
hit. Hard rain fell for a while&mdash;no idea how long&mdash;several lightning
strikes lit the tent and the thunder was loud.

This morning, some animal made a noise that woke Royce and we slowly crawled out
of the tent to investigate. Some stupid squirrel, no doubt. Yesterday was a big
day for us. So we sip our coffee, chat, and amble around camp, stopping only to
stare at things and to shake water off our tent and packs. Everything important
was in a pack and was dry. So our camp discipline is good, even if we'e not
feeling spritely.

There is still a slight breeze from the south, so the thunderstorm brought no
major weather change. The overcast is moderately thick, but not as thick as
yesterday evening. A few bugs are around but they're not bad.

Saw Osprey hanging around their nest.

We made very good time on the paddle to Prairie Portage, arriving there just
before 15:00.

Royce made the popular hash browns with hamburger and gravy for dinner. There
will be leftovers.

[index](#index)

## 2025-08-10 Day 5: Carp Lake to Ottertrack Lake

### 2025-08-10T08:36:25-05:00 (48.09174, -91.31100) 1370 feet: Camp on Carp Lake

The landing for this camp is through brush and there is no place to sit
out or swim, but it's the best of a bad lot.

This campsite, and the three others that are nearby in Quetico, are not much
used. All but this one have down trees, making it not at all obvious that they
ever were a campsite. If we had not looked carefully, we would not have seen the
tumbled down fire rings on any of them. Here, the fire rings has a green sprout
growing in it, so it's not much used.

![Fire ring on Carp Lake 2025-08-10 08:43](./attachments/202508100843-000.jpeg "Fire ring on Carp Lake 2025-08-10 08:43")

All the campsites on the US side were occupied.

I would've liked to have made it to Robinson Island but we were both too tired
to make it that far.

While we were eating breakfast and packing up, Royce was reviewed the map and
spotted an alternate route to Knife Lake, so we've been musing about it. Just
north of us, there is a 280 feet/17 rod portage to Crawford Lake. After a short
paddle, there is a 0.4 miles/135 rod portage to Back Bay of Knife Lake, which
bay would bring us into Knife north of Robbins Island. This route would be in
lieu of the portages from Carp to Melon, Melon to Seed, Seed to the unnamed
lake, the Big Knife Portage (75 rods), plus the paddle from the portage past the
east end of Robbins Island. I’ve never paddled that part of Knife Lake; we
normally just blast past it on the border route, so it intrigues me.

A middle-aged couple paddled past our camp, heading south. They might've seen or
taken the portage to Crawford but we don't think to ask&mdash;plus they might've
thought it rude to have questions shouted at them by strangers. We decide to not
risk the time we'd need to explore portages that we know nothing about, and
decide to stick with our original plan and to take the portage to Melon Lake.

(Packing note: yesterday, we had moved both pairs of our Chaco &ldquo;magic
sandals&rdquo; from the rubber pack to the gear pack and were surprised how
notable the extra weight was. Today, to balance the load, we moved one pair to
the food pack.)

Yesterday, the weather was calm until evening, with clouds rolling in and out.
When we made camp, the wind was notable. When we went to the tent, the wind had
almost died but not quite entirely. It is now low, with occasional gusts. No
clouds excepting a few mares tales.

Leftover hash browns and oatmeal for breakfast this morning. Brown gravy residue
does't go as well with coffee as does oatmeal.

The food barrels are notably lighter and we've started moving gear into them.

On Carp, our presence offended a beaver.

I choose to paddle along the north shore of Birch Lake. I'd forgotten how many
down trees there in the water. A few trees are standing well out in the lake.
The first dam at Prairie Portage was built around 1900. Could these standing
dead trees be from before that?

![Royce on Big Knife Portage 2025-08-10 11:33](./attachments/202508101133-000.jpeg "Royce on Big Knife Portage 2025-08-10 11:33")

### 2025-08-10T20:28:15-05:00 (48.15676, -91.12724) 1409 feet: Camp on Ottertrack Lake

We were paddling into a headwind when we left camp this morning but for most of
the day, we had ideal conditions. For the last couple of hours on Knife we had
quartering winds on the stern, which was tough. Even so, we made great time,
topping out at 5 mph for short bursts.

Our first portage of the day was from Carp to Melon. It was busy&mdash;one
couple and two groups of guys. The couple seemed to have their house in order
and passed us without making an impression. But both groups of guys were
carrying a menagerie of gear: packs, duffels, boxes, and everyone had both hands
full of rods, paddles, and other gear. Though I always want to tighten up how we
portage, when I see groups like them, I can't help but to think we're actually
pretty good at it.

We met a couple and their seven-year-old and five-year-old girls on one of the
Knife river portages. Mom made it known that both daughters were experienced
voyageurs and were &ldquo;portage queens&rdquo;. The older had made her first
canoe trip at age 3 on Seagull Lake and said that she remembered how fun it was
to portage to Alpine for a picnic. The younger raised her arms and yelled
&ldquo;Yay!&rdquo; whenever mom or dad said &ldquo;portage queen&rdquo;.

Around 12:40, we stopped for lunch on the west campsite on Robbins Island, and
took a 15 or 20 minute rest. It's a lovely site.

I had trouble finding the Knife Lake narrows. Or rather, I went directly to the
right place but couldn't believe that what I was looking at was &ldquo;the
narrows&rdquo; because it really is narrow&mdash;so small and rocky that we
could barely float through it. We stopped, looked at maps, and cursed for
several minutes before realizing what I had seen actually was the narrows.

BWCA portages, especially on the border route, are usually easy to spot
because they're heavily used and get regular maintenance. To my surprise, the
Little Knife Portage, from Knife to Ottertrack, was behind a screen of brush and
wasn't obvious&mdash;at least to our eyes. Of the portages we did today, it had
the steepest climb&mdash;a real up-and-down.

Shortly after the portage from Knife Lake, we made camp around 16:30 on the US
(BWCA) side of Ottertrack. Compared to the sites in Quetico, this one is notably
more heavily used&mdash;and it comes equipped with obnoxious and aggressive
chipmunks that we must shoo away from our gear.

Saw a lot of loons today. One pair of let us paddle within 6 feet.

We finished the last of the tequila and switched to bourbon and had our first
backpacker meal. As before, it is food. They have reduced the sodium but have
not improved the taste. Royce had a particularly reprehensible take on Spanish
Rice called *Italian Style Pepper Steak*. I found it boring but edible.

Good day and good weather. Paddling was challenging enough to keep me focused.
The wind forced me to paddle on one side for long stretches which was awfully
tiring, but needs must.

Tomorrow, we turn north into a bay of Ottertrack that I've never seen. THen we
head into Jasper and further north into Quetico.

[index](#index)

## 2025-08-11 Day 6: Ottertrack Lake to Saganagons Lake

### 2025-08-11T19:04:01-05:00 (48.26726, -91.04823) 1411 feet: Camp on Saganagons Lake

Ottertrack Lake was as pretty as I remember. I snapped a few pictures
that do not do it justice.

![Cliffs on Ottertrack 2025-08-11 10:42](attachments/202508111042-001.jpeg "Cliffs on Ottertrack 2025-08-11 10:42")

Even by Quetico standards, the portage to Jasper was hard to find.

![Royce on Ottertrack to Jasper Lake portage 2025-08-11 11:16](./attachments/202508111116-000.jpeg "Royce on Ottertrack to Jasper Lake portage 2025-08-11 11:16")

The portage from Ottertrack to Jasper stopped at a pond (48.20708, -91.07873 to
48.20694, -91.07861) where we had to paddle for a few hundred feet to the next
part of the portage.

![Royce on portage after mid trail pond on Ottertrack to Jasper 2025-08-11 12:19](./attachments/202508111219-000.jpeg "Royce on portage after mid trail pond on Ottertrack to Jasper 2025-08-11 12:19")

The landings for the portage between Jasper Lake and Lillypad Lake was difficult
on both sides, but the trail was fairly easy and showed signs of recent
maintenance.

We had lunch on Jasper at quite a nice site. We were tempted, but we have miles
to go.

The last portage, from Lillypad to Saganagons was, by far, the worst of the day.
The start was so steep that when I tilted the canoe up far enough, I had to
fight to keep it from sliding backwards off my shoulders. Before each step, I
had to carefully pick where to put my feet and to gather my
strength&mdash;nothing like the quick &ldquo;giant step, quick step, step, step,
giant step&rdquo; of years past. (Royce told me I moved like I did decades ago;
just not as fast. I'm not sure how to take that.) On the descent, the canoe
repeatedly slid forward, off my shoulders, until it rested on my neck. The
finish was a muddy stream that was &ldquo;too thin to portage and too thick to
paddle.&rdquo; which gradually opened to Saganagons. It required much
shenanigans to get our gear, and then ourselves away from shore and into the
canoe. Taking a page from Peter delValle, we loaded the canoe and then pushed it
while sinking past our knees in the muck and floating grass, until the water was
deep enough to float the canoe with us in it. Showing our years of experience,
we oh-so-gracefully made it into the canoe and paddled our way into the lake.

![Royce on Saganagons end of portage from Lillypad 2025-08-11 15:37](./attachments/202508111537-000.jpeg "Royce on Saganagons end of portage from Lillypad 2025-08-11 15:37")

We saw toad on the portage and a leopard frog at the lake.

That portage left us both so tired enough we stopped early. We got the tent up
and took a quick swim to rinse off some of the loon poop.

Sometime after lunch, the smoke started to blow in. Red sky now even though the
sun is a couple hand widths above the horizon.

Reached camp around 16:00.

In tent at 20:20. When the wind started to die down, the mosquitoes started to
buzz. But by then we had camp set for the night, our teeth brushed, etc., and so
only had to pop into the tent.

[index](#index)

## 2025-08-12 Day 7: Saganagons Lake to Koko Falls

We paddled around the big peninsula on Saganagons because the portage was not
where either the *Fisher* and *NatGeo* maps showed it. (One thing about the
GPS&mdash;we know for sure where we are.) The *BRMB Paddling Trails* map shows
the portage farther to the east, around a small peninsula, but we decided not to
take the time to look there. We made good time heading east and reasonably good
time heading west. I don't know how much time we lost&mdash;if
any&mdash;paddling the extra seven miles vs. the (unknown) portage.

![Royce. Lunch break on Saganagons Lake 2025-08-12 13:03](./attachments/202508121303-000.jpeg "Royce. Lunch break on Saganagons Lake 2025-08-12 13:03")

### 2025-08-12T18:35:35-05:00 (48.31220, -91.11031) 1346 feet

We make dinner at the end of Little Falls portage since we figure that
if we wait to make dinner until we're in camp, it'll be dark and we'd
be swarmed by mosquitoes.

Thunderstorm blew through while we were portaging. Hazy overcast now.

![View downstream of Little Falls 2025-08-12 18:37](./attachments/202508121837-000.jpeg "View downstream of Little Falls 2025-08-12 18:37")

![Royce with dinner at downstream end of Little Falls 2025-08-12 18:37](./attachments/202508121837-001.jpeg "Royce with dinner at downstream end of Little Falls 2025-08-12 18:37")

### 2025-08-12T21:14:03-05:00 (48.31543, -91.11356) 1365 feet Camp on Koko Falls Portage

It was getting dark, so we made camp at around 19:20 on a &ldquo;Fort
Necessity&rdquo; near Koko Falls, a short distance off the portage.

We've been the tent for a few minutes. If only we've been here a few tens of
minutes earlier so we could've done things like brush our teeth.

Another party was camped across the river from the start of the portage.

We saw two groups of three canoes each. One on Saganagons and the other leaving
the river.

It was a longer day than we expected. We do a poor job of estimating travel time
from the map. And of course, we did not expect up to paddle around the
peninsula. I don't know what it is, but something has happened in the last 23
years to make the portages harder.

[index](#index)

## 2025-08-13 Day 8: Koko Falls to west of Rose Island on Kawnipi Lake

![Camp on Koko Falls portage 2025-08-13 07:53](./attachments/202508130753-000.jpeg "Camp on Koko Falls portage 2025-08-13 07:53")

### 2025-08-13T20:25:34-05:00 (48.38173, -91.30458) 1325 feet Camp on Kawnipi Lake

We were out of camp by 9:15 and done with the portage by 10:00.

At the end of the portage, we meet Bob and Janice, formally of Calgary. They
were the couple we saw camped last night, before this portage. Janice told us
that, when they saw us start the portage in the half-light, they thought we must
be a couple of hard-core guys who were trying to race through the Hunters Island
loop. I explained that we were racing, but only against the light, and only
because we had screwed up.

We chat for a bit. Bob is recently recovered from an ankle replacement and said
that he is happy with the results. It must be pretty good&mdash;he's carrying
packs on rough ground. Janet said she is 76 and that Bob is &ldquo;much
older&rdquo;.

Because they're about ten years older than us and are still making these trips,
I was keenly interested in their gear. I didn't ask how many days they had
packed for, but their load was a lot lighter.

They carried two medium sized rubber packs with hip belts, each of which is
smaller than the rubber pack that Royce and I are sharing. I suspect the total
volume of their two packs is only a little more than our shared pack, but that
likely means that each person is carrying less weight. I'm sure the hip belt
helps too. Their food pack is a single barrel which is about the size of one of
the two that we carry. Their barrel is rigged in a harness which puts its weight
further away from the body, which I don't like&mdash;at all. Finally, each of
them has a PFD and a paddle (and I didn't see a spare paddle). They use a Souris
River 17' canoe, which, if memory serves, is about the weight of our MN2. They
are shopping for a lighter canoe to make it easier for them to continue making
these trips.

I can't believe that all they had, but that's all that I noted&mdash;would've
loved to have done a pack dump with them.

To give Bob a break, I carried his personal pack on top of our food pack. They
were a pleasure to chat with and gave hope to both Royce and me that, in 10
years, we might still be on a trail like this.

When we left them to continue downstream, they were looking at the rapids
downstream of the falls and were discussing how to run them. I gather they did
not think the rapids would be particularly challenging.

![Royce on downstream end of Koko Falls portage](./attachments/202508131109-000.jpeg "Royce on downstream end of Koko Falls portage 2025-08-13 11:09")

The only the other party we saw yesterday was a young man in a solo
canoe on Kawnipi Lake. He was traveling the opposite direction.

We're now back on the Fisher maps that Royce brought. The way the maps are
divided, we needed a small area from one map and he had decided not to bring it.
Wish he had&mdash;scrolling around on the tiny GPS screen isn't fun.

As I've noted, the Quetico campsites that the Fisher maps mark are, a best, a
suggestion to maybe look nearby. For example, we found one site&mdash;that
wasn't on the map&mdash;across the bay from where we are. It had not been used
in a long time. The put-in was horrible&mdash;rocks. Maybe, if we'd been wearing
magic sandals and had been ten years younger, we might've have jumped out on the
sloped smooth rock but anything else would have required navigating around
underwater obstructions.

We arrived in camp around 17:00. The landing is sandy, which makes it easy to
hop in and out of the canoe, but does make it difficult to gather un-silted
water for the water filter.

Some trees have been taken down and left. We're don't know why&mdash;they don't
look to have been window-makers. Also, we understood that Quetico does not do
campsite maintenance.

Kawnipi was kind to us and gifted us with swift travels. It's a big lake and
and we've already covered most of it.

[index](#index)

## 2025-08-14 Day 9: West of Rose Island on Kawnipi Lake to Shelly Lake

### 2025-08-14T20:56:40-05:00 (48.45243, -91.34913) 1279 feet

As we were packing, the wind started gusting. Two guys paddled past in what
looks like MN2. They were making good time but were paddling hard. By the time
we were ready to leave, the increasing wind and growing white caps led us to
decide to wait out the gusts.

On the water around noon. Wind is from the south again. We make good time.

Because of the wind, we left my planned, more open route, and went through the
&ldquo;fiddly bits&rdquo; to reach the portage to Shelly Lake. Most of the shore
is burnt.

All we could see of the portage were burned trees. It might've been cleared, but
the way the terrain was, we had to commit to a particular spot or risk being
swept down the rapids. We could not see the portage, so we backtracked to
portage to Montgomery Lake.

This portage was hard to find and it was tough&mdash;lots of rocks and a path so
narrow that the canoe kept catching in the trees. To make it more fun, it had
mucky areas and a small stream crossing. The nearby beaver dam might've have
changed things, but we think it more likely that the portage is not much used.

Montgomery Lake also had been heavily burnt, and was, basically, a spruce swamp.
We wonder why anyone would portage here. None of the three campsites on it
showed much use. The whole place was ugly.

![Paddling through burn area on Montgomery Lake 2025-08-14 16:37](./attachments/202508141637-000.jpeg "Paddling through burn area on Montgomery Lake 2025-08-14 16:37")

The portage from Montgomery to Shelly was also burnt. Some work had been done to
open it, but just barely enough. There were trees to clamber over, boulders to
step across, etc&mdash;short but unpleasant. The landing area on the Montgomery
side was one very large rock surrounded by mid-calf deep loon poop. And there
were lots of rocks that we had to dodge around before we could get to shore.

![Royce resting on portage from Montgomery to Shelly 2025-08-14 17:08](./attachments/202508141708-000.jpeg "Royce resting on portage from Montgomery to Shelly 2025-08-14 17:08")

We headed south towards the first campsite on Shelly, arriving around 17:30.

This camp is on an island that had mostly burned and is growing back to brush.
But there an open area with enough space to pitch a tent. The wind was howling
so hard that we put rocks on all the stakes and, for the first time, felt the
need to pitch the guy lines. Of course, when bug time came, the wind died.

![Ben standing near tent on a fire-scarred island on Shelly Lake 2025-08-14 19:36](./attachments/202508141936-000.jpeg "Ben standing near tent on a fire-scarred island on Shelly Lake 2025-08-14 19:36")

Curried rice and bacon for dinner.

When I dug my cat hole, I saw a very thin layer of organic matter over carbon
from the last fire, then a few inches of soil, and then another layer of carbon,
then mineral soil. I wonder, how long ago was the fire that produced the lower
layer of carbon?

The portages are taking longer more than we expected. In retrospect, the
Horse/Mile/Basswood Falls portage was relatively easy because, once we had our
load on, it was just a matter of plodding. The portages over the last few days
have required more careful attention. The landings, usually on both sides, tend
to be narrow which requires a bow on approach and and bow out departure, which
requires a great deal of fiddling to get the stern paddler (me) and our packs
out of the canoe or the packs and the bow paddler into it.

[index](#index)

## 2025-08-15 Day 10: Shelly Lake to downstream of Chatterton Falls on Russell Lake

### 2025-08-15T20:39:27-05:00 (48.47556, -91.45539) 1246 feet

We went off track twice before we found the portage to Keats. It's a nice
portage.

We met six young women (Royce guessed they're 20 or younger) that are using two
aluminum canoes that, at first glance, look as if they are wood and canvas. One
had a brass name plate on the bow but I couldn't make it out. One woman carried
each canoe, but they rolled the canoe up in teams of three&mdash;an interesting
technique.

The day started gray and calm then cleared up and got breezy. With the
blue skies and a better vantage, the falls here are more impressive than
those on the Falls chain.

All three portages were well traveled and were reasonably easy to walk, with one
big exception. Early on the portage from Keats to Chatterton we had to step
between boulders that were at 3 to 5 feet high, with several feet between each
bolder. It was extra exciting to step between them while carrying the guide pack
and the canoe.

![Royce on Keats to Chatterton portage - bounding over boulders 2025-08-15 13:22](./attachments/202508151322-001.jpeg "Royce on Keats to Chatterton portage - bounding over boulders 2025-08-15 13:22")

We found some of the portages a few hundred feet off where the maps showed them,
so we learned to get as close to shore as possible, well upstream of the
obstacle, and to carefully scan the shore while paddling slowly. If we found the
actual portage to off by more than a few tens of feet from the map/GPS, I
updated my GPS waypoint.

We camped early on Russell Lake, around 15:40. The main camp is a two-story
walkup&mdash;about a hundred yards and a 30 feet or so up from the landing to
the main camp. Our plan is to hang out and enjoy the pleasant weather and the
gorgeous view.

![Royce coming into camp on Russell Lake 2025-08-15 16:44](./attachments/202508151644-000.jpeg "Royce coming into camp on Russell Lake 2025-08-15 16:44")

We saw one canoe in the far distance but otherwise have the lake to ourselves.

We had whiskey and then more, snacks, then more whiskey. This is the first time
we've been in camp early enough to hang out with nothing urgent to do. It's
quite nice. And we *will* have camp ready before the bug time.

I took a brief but pleasant swim. It was refreshing to not be sticky.
Afterwards, I enjoyed the warm sun.

Royce rehydrated refried beans and served them in tortillas with cheese, rice,
and hot sauce. That meal is a two-time hit.

After a breezy day, the wind died on schedule and the bugs chased us into the
tent.

Except for the early mistakes, we went to the points where we were meant to be
and made good speed&mdash;a bit faster than 3 mph even when the wind was against
us. Our portage discipline has improved, so we moved efficiently. I'm sure it
helped that the portages were not as exhausting.

Royce discovered that he was depending on his trekking poles too much and that
one pole worked better for him.

When we stopped for lunch, I discovered that DEET had leaked out of the pump
bottle into the waterproof bag that I carry in the guide pack. It melted through
the bottom of the bag, melted the outside of my glasses case, and damaged my
wallet, raincoat, etc. We *must* have a different way to carry bug dope. Or get
something that's not as good as solvent as DEET. Vickie recommended something
but I didn't look into it.

[index](#index)

## 2025-08-16 Day 11: Russell Lake to the end of Sturgeon Lake

### 2025-08-16T20:37:53-05:00 (48.42722, -91.71706) 1249 feet

While we were goofing around in camp this morning, two middle-aged women paddle
past, followed by two chatty and much louder younger women.

The portage had a mildly difficult landing, which was followed by a steep climb,
then a corduroy section, and then a horrible descent to a landing that must've
taken us 20 minutes to half an hour to figure out how to load the boat. Rocks
where everywhere and most of them were scraped with aluminum where others had
simply drug their boats over them. We loaded the boat off of one rock and then I
tossed the line to Royce, who pulled it over to where we could get him. What a
mess!

About 40 minutes away from the portage we stopped for lunch at the first easy
place to land. Man, that portage was tough.

Along the way, Royce saw a large pike jump. We also saw something that we
thought was a deadhead, but then it rose a little out of the water, as if to
look at us, and as quickly disappeared. It seemed too far away from shore to be
a beaver, but did seem to be some kind of mammal.

The maps showed us a few close campsites. We aren't in a rush and the idea of a
short day appealed, but the canoe gods were smiling on us, so we decided to take
advantage of the perfect paddling conditions and push to the end of Sturgeon
Lake.

After we turned towards the portage into the Maligne River, we took the first
campsite just after 16:30. It has one reasonable tent site and rocks that have
enough breeze that we could enjoy the sunset without being chased into the tent.
Plus we had a number of dragonflies to provide air cover (hunting around us).

The canoe gods smiled on us again. We crossed Sturgeon under warm and mostly
cloudless skies. The trailing wind occasionally threatened to build up to
something worrisome but always subsided. I don't know our average speed, but I
would expect it to be around 4 mph.

![Hash browns, hamburger, and gravy on Russell Lake 2025-08-16 18:48](./attachments/202508161848-000.jpeg "Hash browns, hamburger, and gravy on Russell Lake 2025-08-16 18:48")

![Sunset view from camp near SW end of Sturgeon Lake 2025-08-16 20:11](./attachments/202508162011-000.jpeg "Sunset view from camp near SW end of Sturgeon Lake 2025-08-16 20:11")

## 2025-08-17 Day 12: End of Sturgeon Lake to Maligne River

### 2025-08-17T09:18:27-05:00 (48.42744, -91.71692) 1249 feet

![Royce eating breakfast on Sturgeon Lake 2025-08-17 08:52](./attachments/202508170852-000.jpeg "Royce eating breakfast on Sturgeon Lake 2025-08-17 08:52")

### 2025-08-17T14:32:14-05:00 (48.41288, -91.75146) 1242 feet

Long lunch on a pleasant campsite that is on the third portage going
west. Portages are well traveled and mostly easy.

Chat with a couple that are 7 days into a 21 day trip with their golden
retriever, Willow. Their food barrel is heavy but I can lift it. How do
they manage with two people and a dog?

![Royce fishing on Maligne River 2025-08-17 14:35](./attachments/202508171435-000.jpeg "Royce fishing on Maligne River 2025-08-17 14:35")

Leave camp at 10 or 11. We only have a short distance to cover today.

### 2025-08-17T20:18:52-05:00 (48.38552, -91.84600) 1213 feet

Ran a few minor rapids that the couple referred to as &ldquo;swifts&rdquo;.
I.e., not really rapids. They obviously have much more experience with white
water than we do. Heck, they swam one after they portaged it. Royce saw an otter
at the end of one swift.

We took them all seriously because we have a little experience and, for all of
its sterling qualities on lakes, the MN2 is *not* a white water boat.

![Downstream of portage on Maligne River 2025-08-17 15:17](./attachments/202508171517-001.jpeg "Downstream of portage on Maligne River 2025-08-17 15:17")

Soon after the Maligne widened to become Tanner Lake, we entered a burn area. We
found a campsite on an island, but it was pretty depressing.

We found our camp site at around 16:30. It is above a small falls, past the
burn, and is just east of the southern tip of May Island. It's a large and well
used site, that is surrounded by pines and firs. There are multiple tent sites.
I pick the one that that seemed most level and discover there's not enough dirt
over the rock to drive even one stake. Fortunately, there are plenty of rocks.

![View of Tanner Lake falls from camp near May Island 2025-08-17 17:14](./attachments/202508171714-000.jpeg "View of Tanner Lake falls from camp near May Island 2025-08-17 17:14")

A trail runs nearby. The map shows that it runs north of Lac la Croix for many
miles to the west, through swamps. A winter trail for mushers?

![Camp on Tanner Lake near May Island 2025-08-17 19:58](./attachments//202508171958-000.jpeg "Camp on Tanner Lake near May Island 2025-08-17 19:58")

Twice tonight we heard what sounds like a Tijuana taxi but we're pretty
we're hearing swans. We've seen more swans this year than I've ever seen.

[index](#index)

## 2025-08-18 Day 13: Tanner Lake to Twin Falls on the Maligne River

<!-- Location info from log is 48.28606, -92.18403) 0 feet
An elevation of 0? The lat/long are a spot in the BWCA near Thumb Lake.
Take the coordinates from the GPS.
-->
### 2025-08-18T19:47:56-05:00 (48.38523, -91.84630) 1197 feet

![Royce packing. Tanner Lake 2025-08-18 09:41](./attachments/202508180941-000.jpeg "Royce packing. Tanner Lake 2025-08-18 09:41")

![Royce at portage around Tanner Rapids on Tanner Lake 2025-08-18 11:27](./attachments/202508181127-000.jpeg "Royce at portage around Tanner Rapids on Tanner Lake 2025-08-18 11:27")

Last night was the first time I had the sleeping bag
draped over my whole body.

We saw a party with three canoes and six adults coming up river. They
were paddling Grumman canoes and all were using a strange stroke. Maybe
I forgotten what it's like to paddle one of those beasts? Also, no
PFDs!

We took great care on each of the small &ldquo;swifts&rdquo;. Maybe too much
care, but neither of us have experience reading a river. As it was, there were
no surprises.

At Twin Falls, the portage I marked was not the one that is commonly used. As a
consequence, we used what I dubbed the &ldquo;Not that island Island
Portage&rdquo;.

![Royce looking at Twin Falls on Maligne River 2025-08-18 13:29](./attachments/202508181329-000.jpeg "Royce lookng at Twin Falls on Maligne River")

![Twin Falls on Maligne River 2025-08-18 14:02](./attachments/202508181402-001.jpeg "Twin Falls on Maligne River 2025-08-18 14:02")

We made camp at around 14:00 on the site we used on our circa 2004 trip with
Royce, his two sons, and me&mdash; the occasion of &ldquo;the great
dunking&rdquo;. Today, the water below camp is quite frothy, a far cry from the
relatively placid water that Royce recalls fishing in back then.

Because of the misting rain and calm winds, the mosquitos chased us into the
tent earlier than usual.

[index](#index)

## 2025-08-19 Day 14: Twin Falls on Maligne to Eau Claire

### 2025-08-19T07:49:27-05:00 (48.37089, -91.93478) 1198 feet

![Camp on Twin Falls of Maligne River 2025-08-19 07:50](./attachments/202508190750-000.jpeg "Camp on Twin Falls of Maligne River 2025-08-19 07:50")

The last morning of the trip. Everything is damp but it's not raining now.

Yesterday, Leslie confirmed our pickup on Bell Island with Zups and today, they
pick us up right on schedule. The first run is to their base, where I settle our
bill. Then they run us to Crane Lake, where we cleared customs at an automated
kiosk.

We were so focused on tying down the canoe that we left the pack that held all
of our clothes, sleeping bags etc., and my PFD on the docks at Crane Lake. We
did so well tracking things&mdash;sounding off before leaving a portage or a
camp. And then we didn't. Fortunately, someone at Scott's brought them in, and
will hold them. Royce will get them after the party for Ripley.

[index](#index)

## 2025-08-21 Leave Eau Claire

Leaving Eau Claire to celebrate Ripley's 1 1/2 birthday.

## General notes

Except around sundown, mosquitoes were about average. But at around 20:00, they
turn into a pestilence. On a wind protected portage, they were sometimes more of
an annoyance. Because of them, even on clear nights, we didn't sit out to star
gaze.

On one of the early nights, I saw a light flashing outside the tent. After a
while trying and failing to identify what gadget was making the light, I
realized I was looking a few fire flies. This is the farthest north I've ever
seen them.

At the beginning of the trip we sweated a lot on the portages and when we first
went to the tent. I wore my sun hoodie to keep sweat off things.

Compared to the Timberline 4 tent that it replaced, the new Big Agnes is
lighter, smaller, more stable in the wind, and is roomy for two with our gear.
So far, its only faults are how careful one must be when closing the zippers and
when undoing the toggle for the rain fly. The Timberline zippers had the same
problem, though they were less finicky.

Some Apple defect locked the satellite conversation with Leslie, so I'm very
glad I had the inReach. Also, it was much harder to get a satellite fixed here
than in Boise. Perhaps a combination of latitude and that there are many more
trees?
